When we looked at the impact of jittering and transparency on scatter plots,
we saw an implied relationship between color, and density of data.
There is a bivariate plot type that uses this relationship explicitly, a heatmap.
In a heatmap, the field is divided into a grid of cells like this,
and the number of data points in each cell is counted up.
Each cell is done given a color based on the counter values.
In this example, the more data points in a grid cell, the darker the color.
A heatmap is like a 2D version of a histogram,
looking at the data from a top-down perspective.
We can't use bar heights in this case,
so color is our next best encoding.
Since assigning values based on color is imprecise,
you should consider adding count annotations on top of each grid cell,
especially if you only have a limited number of cells.
In this way, the heatmap is also like a table,
with additional coloring coding for emphasis.
A heatmap is favored over a scatter plot when you have two discrete variables,
since the associated jittered scatter plot can already be imprecise.
It's also an alternative to adding transparency to
a scatter plot when you have a very large amount of data.
However, like histograms, you need to be aware of
the impact of bin size on the interpretation of the data.
Too large a bin size,
and you may fail to see the major trends in the data,
and with too small a bin size,
you may end up distracted by noise.